blog/2015/11/15/Analyzing Consumer Complaints with Pandas and Python 3.md, before:

# Analyzing Consumer Complaints with Pandas and Python 3
I found a really neat data source online on unwanted robocalls that the FCC
(Federal Communications Commission, a United States government agency) is
tracking. Consumers complaints are being tracked in an openly available
database.

Let's download it and see what it contains!

```python
%%bash
wget https://consumercomplaints.fcc.gov/hc/\
theme_assets/513073/200051444/Telemarketing_RoboCall_Weekly_Data.csv
```

## Reading the Data
Using the convenient `read_csv` method, we can automatically turn a `.csv` file
into a pandas DataFrame.

```python
from pandas import read_csv
s = read_csv('Telemarketing_RoboCall_Weekly_Data.csv')
```

Excellent! As we can see, the DataFrame contains a lot of useful information.
There is the number of a caller, the type of call, the reason for reporting it,
in which state of the US it happened and finally time and date.

## Extracting Information
What interests me the most, is in which hour of the day most robocalls are being
placed at consumer's homes. First, let's create a Series from the 'Time of
Issue' column.


```python
s['Time of Issue']
```

<table class="u-full-width">
  <thead>
    <tr style="text-align: right;">
      <th></th>
      <th>Time of Issue</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>0</th>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>1</th>
      <td>8:20 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>2</th>
      <td>2:00 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>3</th>
      <td>11:46 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>4</th>
      <td>3:19 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>5</th>
      <td>12:00 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>6</th>
      <td>11:00 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>7</th>
      <td>10:21 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>8</th>
      <td>1:02 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>9</th>
      <td>12:58 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>10</th>
      <td>11:11 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>11</th>
      <td>1:30 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>12</th>
      <td>10:35 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>13</th>
      <td>6:50 a.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>14</th>
      <td>11:59 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>15</th>
      <td>10:49 a.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16</th>
      <td>10:51 a.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>17</th>
      <td>8:41 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>18</th>
      <td>11:21 a.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>19</th>
      <td>4:24 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>20</th>
      <td>11:30 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>21</th>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>22</th>
      <td>12:00 P.M.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>23</th>
      <td>1:10 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>24</th>
      <td>2:00 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>25</th>
      <td>1:45 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>26</th>
      <td>11:25 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>27</th>
      <td>2:58 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>28</th>
      <td>2:15 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>29</th>
      <td>9:43 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>...</th>
      <td>...</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16284</th>
      <td>9:17 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16285</th>
      <td>7:07 P.M.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16286</th>
      <td>10:30 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16287</th>
      <td>1:19 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16288</th>
      <td>2:17 P.M.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16289</th>
      <td>8:30 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16290</th>
      <td>11:27 a.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16291</th>
      <td>3:00 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16292</th>
      <td>10:12 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16293</th>
      <td>10:19 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16294</th>
      <td>1:31 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16295</th>
      <td>1:00 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16296</th>
      <td>2:55 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16297</th>
      <td>6:16 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16298</th>
      <td>7:00 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16299</th>
      <td>6:02 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16300</th>
      <td>5:13 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16301</th>
      <td>11:16 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16302</th>
      <td>4:47 P.M.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16303</th>
      <td>8:31 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16304</th>
      <td>6:00 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16305</th>
      <td>1:11 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16306</th>
      <td>5:39 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16307</th>
      <td>1:00 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16308</th>
      <td>3:40 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16309</th>
      <td>3:13 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16310</th>
      <td>3:32 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16311</th>
      <td>5:45 a.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16312</th>
      <td>3:54 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16313</th>
      <td>3:59 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
<p>16314 rows × 1 columns</p>

The column is not well formatted, as 'AM' and 'PM' appear in different
spellings. In order to extract useful information, we need to parse the time
information first.

```python
from datetime import datetime, time
def parse_time(raw_time):
    if raw_time == '-':
        return None
    # This is why we can't have nice things
    raw_time = raw_time.upper().replace(".", "").replace(",", "").replace(
        ":", "").replace(">", "").replace("?", "").replace(
        "  ", " ").replace("MM", "M").zfill(7)
    if raw_time[:2] == "00":
        raw_time = raw_time[1:]
    # Need to use datetime, time has no "strptime"
    dt =  datetime.strptime(
        raw_time,
        "%I%M %p",
    )
    return dt.hour # All this sweat and labor for an hour! Oh heavens!
actual_times = s['Time of Issue'].apply(parse_time)
```

Wasn't that fun? Dealing with messy data is a challenge, but can be mastered
through continuous application of brute-force and being in denial about reality.
A steady supply of coffee helps as well.

Now that we have the actual times, I would like to retrieve the most frequent
hour. Let's do this!

```python
%matplotlib inline
actual_times.hist(bins=24)
```
```
<matplotlib.axes._subplots.AxesSubplot at 0x114d9e860>
```

![Matplotlib Chart](/static/customer_complaints.png)

Aha! Most robo calls get placed around 10-11 AM!

Commit message:

FIX: rephrase some paragraphs in fcc robocall post

blog/2015/11/15/Analyzing Consumer Complaints with Pandas and Python 3.md, after:

# Analyzing Consumer Complaints with Pandas, IPython Python 3
I found a really neat data source online on unwanted robocalls that the FCC
(Federal Communications Commission, a United States government agency) has
created and published openly. The data source provides times and dates of
unwanted robocalls that consumers have reported to the FCC. We can use this data
source to find out all kinds of things, but today we will be content with just
finding out the time of the day households are most likely to receive robocalls.

First, we need to fire up our trusty IPython notebook and download the data. The
data is freely available on the fcc.gov website and is encoded as a `.csv`
(comma separated values) file. Fortunately for us, we don't even need to leave
IPython. We can execute bash commands right here!

```python
%%bash
wget https://consumercomplaints.fcc.gov/hc/\
theme_assets/513073/200051444/Telemarketing_RoboCall_Weekly_Data.csv
```

## Reading the Data
Using the convenient `read_csv` method, we can automatically turn a `.csv` file
into a pandas DataFrame.

```python
from pandas import read_csv
s = read_csv('Telemarketing_RoboCall_Weekly_Data.csv')
```

Excellent! As we can see, the DataFrame contains a lot of useful information.
There is the number of a caller, the type of call, the reason for reporting it,
in which state of the US it happened and finally time and date.

## Extracting Information
Now, in order to retrieve the time of day when the unwanted robocall was
received, we need to take a closer look at the `Time of Issue` column.

```python
s['Time of Issue']
```

<table class="u-full-width">
  <thead>
    <tr style="text-align: right;">
      <th></th>
      <th>Time of Issue</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>0</th>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>1</th>
      <td>8:20 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>2</th>
      <td>2:00 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>3</th>
      <td>11:46 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>4</th>
      <td>3:19 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>5</th>
      <td>12:00 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>6</th>
      <td>11:00 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>7</th>
      <td>10:21 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>8</th>
      <td>1:02 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>9</th>
      <td>12:58 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>10</th>
      <td>11:11 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>11</th>
      <td>1:30 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>12</th>
      <td>10:35 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>13</th>
      <td>6:50 a.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>14</th>
      <td>11:59 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>15</th>
      <td>10:49 a.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16</th>
      <td>10:51 a.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>17</th>
      <td>8:41 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>18</th>
      <td>11:21 a.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>19</th>
      <td>4:24 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>20</th>
      <td>11:30 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>21</th>
      <td>-</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>22</th>
      <td>12:00 P.M.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>23</th>
      <td>1:10 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>24</th>
      <td>2:00 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>25</th>
      <td>1:45 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>26</th>
      <td>11:25 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>27</th>
      <td>2:58 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>28</th>
      <td>2:15 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>29</th>
      <td>9:43 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>...</th>
      <td>...</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16284</th>
      <td>9:17 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16285</th>
      <td>7:07 P.M.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16286</th>
      <td>10:30 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16287</th>
      <td>1:19 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16288</th>
      <td>2:17 P.M.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16289</th>
      <td>8:30 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16290</th>
      <td>11:27 a.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16291</th>
      <td>3:00 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16292</th>
      <td>10:12 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16293</th>
      <td>10:19 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16294</th>
      <td>1:31 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16295</th>
      <td>1:00 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16296</th>
      <td>2:55 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16297</th>
      <td>6:16 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16298</th>
      <td>7:00 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16299</th>
      <td>6:02 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16300</th>
      <td>5:13 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16301</th>
      <td>11:16 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16302</th>
      <td>4:47 P.M.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16303</th>
      <td>8:31 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16304</th>
      <td>6:00 AM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16305</th>
      <td>1:11 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16306</th>
      <td>5:39 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16307</th>
      <td>1:00 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16308</th>
      <td>3:40 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16309</th>
      <td>3:13 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16310</th>
      <td>3:32 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16311</th>
      <td>5:45 a.m.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16312</th>
      <td>3:54 PM</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>16313</th>
      <td>3:59 p.m.</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
<p>16314 rows × 1 columns</p>

The column is not well formatted, as 'AM' and 'PM' appear in different
spellings. Sometimes irregular characters such as "?" and "" appear. Perhaps
this is OCR gone awry. In order to extract useful information, we need to parse
the time information first and ignore a lot of the spelling/encoding errors.

```python
from datetime import datetime, time
def parse_time(raw_time):
    if raw_time == '-':
        return None
    # This is why we can't have nice things
    raw_time = raw_time.upper().replace(".", "").replace(",", "").replace(
        ":", "").replace(">", "").replace("?", "").replace(
        "  ", " ").replace("MM", "M").zfill(7)
    if raw_time[:2] == "00":
        raw_time = raw_time[1:]
    # Need to use datetime, time has no "strptime"
    dt =  datetime.strptime(
        raw_time,
        "%I%M %p",
    )
    return dt.hour # All this sweat and labor for an hour! Oh heavens!
actual_times = s['Time of Issue'].apply(parse_time)
```

Wasn't that fun? Dealing with messy data is a challenge, but can be mastered
through continuous application of brute-force and being in denial about reality.
A steady supply of coffee helps as well.

Now that we have the actual times, I would like to retrieve the most frequent
hour. Let's do this!

```python
%matplotlib inline
actual_times.hist(bins=24)
```
```
<matplotlib.axes._subplots.AxesSubplot at 0x114d9e860>
```

![Matplotlib Chart](/static/customer_complaints.png)

Aha! Most robo calls get placed around 10-11 AM!
