created: 2015-10-25
title: Filtering Trees
tags:
  - python3
  - datastructures
---
Today we are going to look at how to filter items in tree data structures using
Python 3. We are going to compare a stateful approach and a functional and
recursive approach. In the end we will discuss the advantages of a functional
implementation.

## The Task
Assume we have a tree data structure in the form of nested lists, like the following

```python
tree = ['root', [
    ['left_child', []],
    ['middle_child', [
        ['a leaf!', []]],
    ],
    ['right_child', [
        ['right_grandchild', [
            ['another leaf!']]]],
    ],
]
```

<blockquote class="imgur-embed-pub" lang="en" data-id="3XdcPdv"><a href="//imgur.com/3XdcPdv">View post on imgur.com</a></blockquote><script async src="//s.imgur.com/min/embed.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

Find out path to all nodes that have the value "Foobar". There are no
constraints on the tree, such as being sorted, so at least all nodes need to be
inspected at least once.

There are a few ways to do it, following one of many programming styles. We will
explore a few. What all methods have in common, that there needs to be some
mechanism of traversing the tree in order to visit all nodes, and to extract and
return the nodes that match "Foobar".

Before we can get started, we need to create some trees. I like creating
helpers, so a tree generator is going to be very helpful. `gen_tree` will
recursively create a random tree with a maximum depth of 3.

```python
def gen_tree(depth=0, max_depth=3):
    return (
        "Foobar" if randbool() else "Qux",
        tuple(gen_tree(depth + 1) for _ in range(randint(0, 3)))
        if depth < max_depth else tuple(),
    )
```

If you want, you can include `from random import seed; seed(1)` in your code to
ensure that you get the same random tree for every execution. Of course, using a
fixed is stretching the definition of randomness. But for debugging it can be
tremendously helpful.

```python
>>> pprint(gen_tree())
('Qux',
 (('Foobar', (('Qux', (('Foobar', ()),)),)),
  ('Foobar', ()),
  ('Qux',
   (('Qux', (('Qux', ()), ('Qux', ()), ('Foobar', ()))),
    ('Qux', (('Foobar', ()), ('Qux', ()), ('Qux', ()))),
    ('Foobar', (('Qux', ()), ('Qux', ()), ('Qux', ())))))))
```

Now, let's see how easily we can find 'Foobar'.

## Stack-based Traversal
If we're going to traverse a tree structure, we need to take note of which nodes
we've already visited and which we have not seen yet. If we traverse a tree in a
predetermined order, for example depth-first in {pre,in,post}-order, we only
need to be aware of which we need to visit in the future.

Wikipedia has some really nice illustrations showing the different kinds of tree
traversals, so I won't try to do a better job at it. Take a look [right
here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tree_traversal#Depth-first).

```python
def filter_tree(tree, keyword="Foobar"):
    # Our first goal is the tree's root
    # Additionally, we are going to store the path to the node
    # As the second item in the tuple
    goals = [(tree, [tree[0]])]
    while goals:
        node, path = goals.pop()  # pop the first item in the goal queue
        for child_node in node[1]:
            # the path is the current path plus the turn taken
            goals.append((child_node, path + [child_node[0]]))
        if node[0] == keyword:
            yield tuple(path)
```

I am going to be honest with you there. This code is messy and hard to debug. We
have to manually keep track of which paths in the tree need to be visited and
what the path to every node looks like. But it works. Here are all the paths to
nodes that have the value 'Foobar':

```python
>>> pprint(tuple(filter_tree(tree)))
(('Qux', 'Qux', 'Foobar'),
 ('Qux', 'Qux', 'Qux', 'Foobar'),
 ('Qux', 'Qux', 'Qux', 'Foobar'),
 ('Qux', 'Foobar'),
 ('Qux', 'Foobar'),
 ('Qux', 'Foobar', 'Qux', 'Foobar'))
```

Luckily, using `yield` allows us to let the caller take of retrieving the
individual results. That means no `result` temporary list. In general, using
`yield` statements allows for more concise code and better streaming behavior.
Instead of allocating memory for a full list, you can leverage `yield`s paired
with other iterators to only need memory for the end result. This can be useful
if you nest list operations like

```python
map(operator, filter(operator, reduce(operator, ...)))
```

It is important to not forget to unpack a iterable stream once you want to
retrieve the results. Otherwise you will see a result like `<generator object
<genexpr> at 0x...>`

## Recursion-based Traversal
Instead of explicitly tracking our current path and position in the tree, we can
use a trick that functional programmers have figured out before it became cool:
Recursion.

In functional programming state often is encapsulated in the way functions are
called. This has the neat advantage that if you call a function the same way
twice, you will get the same result. Not only does this make your code more
predictable, it also helps writing saner tests with less dependency injection.

Let's dive into the code

```python
def filter_tree_recursive(tree, path=tuple(), keyword="Foobar"):
    # Look ma, no assignment statements
    if tree[0] == keyword:
        yield (path + (tree[0], ))
    for child_node in reversed(tree[1]):
        yield from filter_tree_recursive(child_node, path + (tree[0], ))
```

Note the use of `yield from`, which is only available in Python 3. It lets us
delegate `yield` to another method. Otherwise we would have to unpack the result
of `filter_tree_recursive` into individual yields. This way, we can shave off
one line of code.

What our code does is return the path to the current node if it matches the
search keyword plus call itself on all child nodes. Using the yield statement,
we can avoid storing results in temporary variables. This makes the
function itself store the state of execution. This can have side-effects, but
not in our case.

Our code always fully evaluates the function and does not suspend execution
since we are constructing a tuple out of all yield results, as can be seen
below.  That means that once we are done calculating, the Python runtime
discards the execution state of the current `filter_tree_recursive` call.

```python
>>> pprint(tuple(filter_tree_recursive(tree)))
(('Qux', 'Qux', 'Foobar'),
 ('Qux', 'Qux', 'Qux', 'Foobar'),
 ('Qux', 'Qux', 'Qux', 'Foobar'),
 ('Qux', 'Foobar'),
 ('Qux', 'Foobar'),
 ('Qux', 'Foobar', 'Qux', 'Foobar'))
```

The result is the same, but our code is more predictable and testable.
